---
layout: post
title:  "Open Source in Open Access Environments: Choices and Necessities"
date:   2017-02-17 09:00:00
category: thoughts
author: "Anne B. McGrail"
---

[This paper was originally presented at the MLA 2017 conference as part of the Minimal Computing panel organized by Jentery Sayers. [Slides can be found here]({{site.baseurl}}/images/mcgrail-slides.pdf).]

In April, I will teach what I believe will be the first stand-alone Intro to Digital Humanities course at a community college (CC) in the
Pacific Northwest—maybe the first such course at a CC in the country. I call my course “This Digital Life: Reading, Writing and Culture in a
Digital Age,” because my students don’t know what “digital humanities” is.[^1]

In this course, I will introduce my CC students to a way of thinking
about and comprehending the forces around them—the forces that Alan Liu
calls the “great postindustrial, neoliberal, corporate and global flows
of information and capital” (Liu 491). Community college students’ lives
are immersed in precarity wrought by these flows; only the grittiest of
them will overcome the bleak economic for economic mobility in America.
Articulating how those forces affect them is one of the most important
learning outcomes of DH at the CC.

But what are the minimal computing coordinates for CC students? And
where does open source fit in an open access environment? I hadn’t
really thought of this before reading Alex Gil’s and Jentery Sayers’
definitions of “minimal computing;” I am unsure how to use Raspberry Pi
and I can barely work with Markdown templates. I do use whatever tools
are available and we’ll read whatever open educational resources we can
find. Perhaps, following Gil and Ernesto Oroza, my community college DH
course will follow a kind of “architecture of necessity.”

While the *surface* features of my course are not strictly “minimal,”
they share *structural* affinities to the GO::DH values of maximum
access and longevity: My students might *read* Gil’s and Sayer’s pieces
but they will likely *write* about them using Google or Word on their
laptops and email me using Outlook—transgressing minimal computing
principles at every keystroke. I think that these *definitions* of
minimal computing themselves point to a set of assumptions for
humanistic computing that are worth considering in CC students’ digital
lives.

I’ve practiced not “minimal” computing but what Roopika Risam calls
“micro DH.” Since 2012, I have embedded whatever I could invent or learn
in all my courses, adopting and adapting from a generous DH Pedagogy
Community and translating research so that my students can appreciate
the cool factor of big data without slamming up against skill barriers
to data mining; and then I send students to Wordle or Voyant so they can
work the magic themselves. My students dive into archives and annotate
texts using Google docs. Sometimes we “break” Google or Twitter because
our computer lab is equipped with lame machines and the systems crash.
The Computer Help Desk folks are so used to hearing from me about
glitches during class that they respond immediately when I call; if I
ever have a classroom emergency, it’s them I’ll call first, not campus
security.

**Reconsiderations and a Maturing Field**

While minimal computing intends to create conditions for maximum
inclusiveness, I fear that in practice it may exclude underprepared
students in open-access institutions.

The minimalist turn registers the effects of uneven development in the
academy. Community colleges are just beginning to recognize the term
“digital humanities,” and faculty are just beginning to figure out how
digital assignments fit into their courses. In many, although not all,
cases, “minimal computing” assignments take maximal preparation--for CC
faculty still untrained in the field and for unevenly prepared students.

Jentery anticipates the critique that minimal computing may produce
different impacts to different agents in an unevenly developing field.
He asks, “what sort of expertise and decision-making \[does minimization
assume\]” and how do “we define ‘we’ in relation to necessity and
simplicity?” (“Minimal Definitions”). Necessary for what? Simple for
whom? Under what constraints?

For community colleges, the purpose of humanities education is to
empower students with *as much* mastery of *as many* tools as possible
for *full participation* in civic and cultural life. How we define
“minimal computing” at the CC needs to support that purpose.

For I’m not just talking about access to any particular set of digital
tools—whether “minimal” or “maximal”--in this regard. Rather, it’s
students’ *transformed understanding* that I am after—the crossing of a
threshold from accepting a received cultural landscape to a deep reading
of it. Open-access institutions may make use of “maximal” tools as a
*relay* for critically engaging with the digital life they lead. In so
doing, they may achieve ends that “minimal computing” principles intend.

Participation, writes Carpentier, is “strongly related to the power
logics of decision making” (8). Carpentier’s foregrounding of power
relations and social capital helps us to situate values of minimal
computing in an open-access CC context. Looking at Jentery’s
comprehensive list of the features of minimal computing, we see that he
is going for a maximalist model of participation in stewardship of the
cultural record and in knowledge production and dissemination. The list
helps elaborate the question that Alex Gil asks—that of “what do we
*need*?” --and imagines a DH architecture of necessity that ensures
scholars’ *maximal* role in decisions and maximal control of future use.

While community colleges share disciplinary affinities with their
counterparts at 4-year colleges and universities, these affinities mask
power differentials between CCs and their four-year counterparts.
Carpentier’s focus on power provides language for recognizing the
differences between four-year institutions and CCs and for responding to
those differences.[^2] This power differential is visible in multiple
spheres, but here are a couple of examples to illustrate how it impacts
faculty and students at CCs: \[slide 1\]

-   First, graduate school doesn’t train most humanities graduates for
    the demands of CC teaching

-   Second**,** graduate faculty rarely maintain close professional ties
    with students who land jobs at CCs. I call this the “You’re dead to
    me” model of mentorship.

-   Effects of this dynamic on professional development have been to
    create an hermetic CC professional world cut off in important ways
    from developments in the larger field

-   This dynamic limited what should have been a much earlier diffusion
    of digital humanities methods into CC curricula.[^3]

**Additionally**, the role that contingency and precarity play in CC
faculty lives cannot be overstated. Part-time/adjunct faculty represent
nearly 70% of the instructional workforce of community colleges and 47%
of humanities educators overall (“A National Survey” and “Traditional
versus Nontraditional Humanities Faculty”). Many part-time or adjunct
humanities faculty teach given syllabi or are limited in the texts they
can select. Maximal equity in participatory decision-making in
curriculum is harder for contingent faculty to achieve.

**And what about CC students**?

What might minimal computing look like for them and how might they
practice it? Student diversity is the open access institution’s best
asset and biggest challenge. [^4] Jentery raises the issue of time in
relation to reduced consumption (“Minimal Definitions”); working class
time orientation is characterized by “precarity”—a sense that struggles
in and endurance of the present are more salient than investments in a
future imaginary. You could say that CC priorities are driven by a
working class time orientation toward the “short now” and not the “long
now” thinking required of the minimal critical movement (“Minimal
Definitions”).

**How else might “minimal” computing impact students’ full
participation?** “Creative failure” and “generative messing around” may
directly challenge an already profound sense of what Walton and Cohen
call “belonging uncertainty.” Experiences of failure that middle-class
students may simply slough off disparately impact minority students’
sense of belonging and social “fit” in college. CC students are already
“doing the risky thing” (Fitzpatrick)—they’re going to college.
Trial—and especially *error*--around spartan and user-***un***friendly
interfaces can challenge even the most confident of lifelong learners.
Recently, I fell short of completing a Github pull request after many
tries, and I had the humbling experience of standing on the wrong side
of a threshold. Perhaps for CC students, commercial interfaces *are* the
“architecture of necessity” (Gil)-- the best way to ensure that they
cross important thresholds when taking on digital projects.

When I was reading about minimal computing, the words “syntactic sugar”
and “syntactic salt” popped up. This language of low-processing and
elemental design pepper minimal computing definitions and put me in mind
of the language of food politics--Whole Foods, organic produce, farmers’
markets and distributed pantry movements. Why is it, I wondered, that
the advantages of bypassing the supermarket to ensure maximal autonomy
are only realized by middle-class families with huge domestic
square-footage and mini-vans? Do the conflicting urgencies of class and
environment operate in minimal computing?

If they do, what kind of computing can help CC students comprehend and
intervene in the high-speed, overprocessed environment of their “digital
life”? Thinking of supermarkets led me to consider how McDonald’s,
Burger King, Taco Bell and KFC leverage food deserts for profit. I
looked up the Food Desert locator data visualization map posted by the
USDA \[**Figure 1 “Food Desert Map”**\], and then quickly also found the
Fast Food restaurant map \[**Figure 2 “Fast Food Locator”**\]. Then I
went back to the GO::DH map that locates DH centers globally \[**Figure
3 “In a Rich Man’s World: Global DH”**\] and created my own DH at the CC
data viz map using Google Maps to see what it might reveal. This was
networked computing toward a local end \[**Figure 4 “The Only CC Digital
Humanities Faculty in the PacNW Flies to the MLA”**\].

So I’m saying that “maximum” computing can serve “minimal computing”
ends of inclusiveness and participation, but I do know I need to avoid
creating conditions for CCs to become digital equivalents of food
deserts. A sole diet of Google, Microsoft, Twitter, Facebook, Instagram,
Snapchat et al. could play into a lifetime of dependence on
overprocessed commercial platforms. Meanwhile CC students’ four-year
counterparts at Honors Colleges and First Year Interest Groups tinker
with their Tiny Linuxes, “healthy choices” and “whole foods” of
Raspberry Pi. But for now, that’s where my staircase ends.

Works Cited

Carpentier, Nico Carpentier and Peter Dahlgren. “Introduction:
Interrogating audiences– Theoretical horizons of participation” *CM* :
*Communication Management Quarterly* : Časopis za upravljanje
komuniciranjem 21 (2011) 7–12 © 2011. Print.

Fitzpatrick, Kathleen. “Do the ‘Risky Thing’ in Digital Humanities.”
*Chronicle of Higher Education.* September 25, 2011.
<http://www.chronicle.com/article/Do-the-Risky-Thing-in/129132/>
Accessed Dec. 22, 2016.

Gil, Alex. “The User, the Learner and the Machines We Make.” *Minimal
Computing.* 21 May 2015. Accessed Dec. 15, 2017.
<http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2015/05/21/user-vs-learner/>

“A National Survey of Part-Time/Adjunct Faculty.” *American Academic*
Vol. 2 March 2010. p. 3. Web. March 18, 2014. Web.
<http://www.aft.org/sites/default/files/aa_partimefaculty0310.pdf>

Sayers, Jentery. “Minimal Definitions” 2 Oct 2016. Web. Accessed
1/1/2016.

----. “Mimimal Definitions: tl;dr Version” 3 Oct 2016. Web. Accessed
1/1/2016.\
<http://go-dh.github.io/mincomp/thoughts/2016/10/02/minimal-definitions/>

“Traditional versus Nontraditional Humanities Faculty” *Humanities
Indicators: a project of the Academy of Arts and Sciences*
<http://humanitiesindicators.org/content/indicatorDoc.aspx?i=73> Web.
Accessed 12.31.16.

Walton, Gregory M. and Geoffrey L. Cohen. “A Question of Belonging:
Race, Social Fit, and Achievement.” *JPSP* 2007 Vol 92. No. 1 p. 82-96.

Food Desert Map.
<http://nutrition.healthgrove.com/stories/17584/where-are-americas-food-deserts>

Fast Food Map.
<https://www.ers.usda.gov/data-products/food-access-research-atlas/go-to-the-atlas/>

[^1]: I should have heeded Ryan Cordell’s advice about course naming
    <http://ryancordell.org/teaching/how-not-to-teach-digital-humanities/>

[^2]: I want to acknowledge here the existence of many under-resourced
    four-year colleges and universities as well, and that we are talking
    about a complex system of power and privilege operating in higher
    education. But CCs have an open-access mission and a lower-division
    or foundational focus, and this puts them at a singular disadvantage
    in terms of social capital—for students, for faculty within the
    profession.

[^3]: There are some hopeful signs on the horizon in this regard: The
    University of Washington and CUNY Graduate Center have explicitly
    engaged with community colleges as a site for expanding public
    humanities, but the impacts of these initiatives remain to be seen.

[^4]: CC Student facts: There are 992 public community colleges in the
    US, and community college students make up 46% of all undergraduates
    in the US and 41% of all first-time freshmen. Sixty-one percent of
    Native American college undergraduates are enrolled in community
    colleges; 52% of Black students and 43% of Asian/Pacific Islander
    undergraduates are enrolled in community colleges; 50% of Hispanic
    college students begin at community college. In the US, 59% of
    community college students are enrolled part-time, and 59% are women
    (American Association of Community Colleges, “Enrollments”). The SES
    data on CC students are well known (Adelman): 44% percent of
    low-income students attend community colleges as their first college
    out of high school as compared to 15% of high-income students
    (Community College Research Center). Sixty-nine percent of community
    college students work, with 33% working more than 35 hours per week;
    22% are full-time students employed full-time; 40% are full time
    students employed part-time; and 41% of part-time students are
    employed full-time. And first-generation students make up 36% of
    community college student populations (American Association of
    Community Colleges, “Fast Fact Sheet”).


