---
layout: post
title:  "What’s a Subject Librarian Doing with Minimal Computing?"
date:   2017-01-15 04:00:00
category: thoughts
author: Meredith Levin
---

[The following paper was delivered at the DLF 2016 Forum in Milwaukee on the "Minimal Computing in Libraries: Case Studies and the Case" panel]

&#9758; [Link to the slides]({{site.baseurl}}/images/mlevin-dlf-2016.pdf).

**Slide 1**

No, really. What am I doing with minimal computing? I’m not a
technologist and my job doesn’t require me to engage on a very deep
level with the digital humanities. I’m a subject librarian and although
I’ve worked on digital projects before there isn’t really an everyday
need for minimal computing in my world. However, I have had a DH project
on my mind that I have long wanted to do and minimal computing seemed
like the perfect way to get me started in the very, very, very limited
time that I have to pursue independent research.

**Slide 2**

Many of you here have heard all about our mhdh project which, in a
nutshell, was an attempt to familiarize a bunch of humanities subject
librarians with the tools and methodologies of digital humanities, so
that we could be better partners and advisors on projects being
developed by students and faculty. The end result, the homepage of which
you see here, is an Omeka exhibition on various buildings and landmarks
in Columbia’s NYC neighborhood, Morningside Heights.

We each chose our own building or site to research but we worked
together in small teams on various elements of the project. The
development team was responsible for the coding and back end of the
site. We spent a lot of time learning how to use GitHub, how to code
with PHP, how to edit CSS files, and how to break stuff on a daily
basis. We were lucky that Alex was a floater on all the teams and was
basically an honorary member of the Development team because he always
fixed all our errors and explained what we were doing wrong.

We also learned, though it goes against our instincts as research
librarians, that 95% of problems/questions related to coding can we
solved by Googling “how to….”

**Slide 3**

This is the last page of my exhibition on The Riverside Church. From a
technical standpoint it’s nothing to write home about but our whole
focus was always process not product and I have to acknowledge that I
learned a lot. But, even though I know Omeka pretty well it can be
clunky and inflexible, and requires a fair amount of attention which
made it a poor choice for my DH project (which I’ll finally tell you
about) since I can never devote a lot of time to it.

**Slide 4**

So...Dr. William Wilberforce Baldwin, whom I discovered when researching
my undergraduate senior thesis, was a colorful character with an
interesting life. I ended up not writing about him for my thesis but I
never forgot about the extensive collection of unpublished letters to
him held at the Morgan (7 boxes) and I always dreamed of doing a social
network analysis to understand where/when all his famous correspondents
crossed paths and interacted in the course of their world travels.

In 2015, I finally decided I would start working on the project,
even if I could only move at a glacial pace, which I am. I’ve begun by
transcribing all the letters in the collection and I’m building a
database of names, places, and dates which will help me in later phases
of the project when I plan to map the letters in Carto and create some
Gephi visualizations for the social network. That picture by Herkomer is at the Uffizi in Florence, donated by
Baldwin’s children in the 1970s. I’ve been working for about a year,
taking one research day a month at the Morgan (although none this
semester) and I’m about halfway through transcribing the collection. As
I learned more about minimal computing principles, it became clear to me
that I could turn all of my painstakingly transcribed letters into a
digital edition.

**Slide 5**

Using [Ed/Jekyll](http://elotroalex.github.io/ed/) enables me to create a quick, user-friendly, gorgeously
clean digital edition of the fascinating letters in Baldwin’s archive.

Definition of Ed: “Ed is a Jekyll theme designed for textual editors
based on minimal computing principles, and focused on legibility,
durability, ease and flexibility. Our underlying technology is easy to
learn and teach, and can produce beautifully rendered scholarly or
reading editions of texts meant to last.”

Definition of Jekyll: “*Jekyll* is a simple, blog-aware, static site
generator. ... *Jekyll* also happens to be the engine behind GitHub
Pages, which means you can use *Jekyll* to host your project's page,
blog, or website from GitHub's servers for free.”

Here you can see the homepage with a brief description and the index of
letters below. I’ve chosen to order the letters by author’s last name
although I’ve also considered ordering them chronologically. Once I have
a map done in Carto, even if it’s just a partial map, I’m hoping to
embed it on the homepage above the site description.

** Slide 6 and 7 **

I customized the metadata for location and date because it’s important
to contextualize these letters.

I haven’t figured out how I want to indicate unclear spelling so I’m
using (?) for now. I’ve also considered using footnotes for unclear
spelling but am on th efence.

As I add more letters and documents in other formats, I may need to
tweak the metadata fields again.

The current biographical note is just her birth and death years and a
link to a very brief biography of her from a Spanish archive (she was
married to a Spanish nobleman and diplomat). I plan to fill it out more
and make it a bit more engaging.

Slide 7—another short letter so you can see how clean and easy to read
it is. I may increase the font size slightly but otherwise it’s really
easy on the eyes.

I’ve also included physical description of the letter because often
letters were written on hotel stationery or envelopes came from villas
or private estates where these people would stay- tells us a lot about
how they traveled, who they knew, how extensive the social network could
be.

**Slide 8**

Minimal computing works so well for so many people because it doesn’t
have a steep learning curve

Basic commands in terminal and the most basic knowledge of github are
all you need…

On the left are instructions Alex created for me so I could start
building and editing the site. On the right you can see me actually
following those commands in terminal. It’s almost too easy.

**Slide 9**

Use a basic text editing interface like TextWrangler and the handy
templates that come with Ed to get er’ done.

I’m using the narrative template to format and transcribe the letters.
It accommodates most prose genres I think and has been pretty flexible
for me.

You can also see my filename system on the left- makes it easy to track
things and keep them in order, especially when there are multiple
letters from the same author.

Exhibit A on the left is my trusty colleague cleaning up the metadata so
that my 19th century letters don’t display with the year 2016 in them!

**Slide 10**

I just wanted to show this lovely complimentary railroad ticket that was
given to Baldwin and his wife by his friend, the railroad manager,
Thomas E. Clarke, but which was seemingly never used. I hope that I have
the time and energy to keep working on the project so that my digital
edition of the letters doesn’t become as obsolete as the Delaware,
Lackawanna & Western Railroad, which went out of business in the early
20th century. If I don’t end up finishing, it’s going to be in spite of
how easy and accessible Ed and minimal computing are…

**Slide 11 **

The END
